The third component of
a data model is constraints.
A constraint is a logical statement.
That means one can compute and test
whether the statement is true or false.
Constraints are part of the data model
because they can specify something about
the semantics, that is,
the meaning of the data.
For example,
the constraint that a week has seven and
only seven days is something that a data
system would not know unless this
knowledge is passed on to it
in the form of a constraint.
Another constraint, shown here,
Tells the system that the number of
titles for a movie is restricted to one.
Different data models,
as we'll see in the next module,
will have different kinds of constraints.
There may be many different
kinds of constraints.
A value constraint is a logical
statement about data values.
On a previous slide we have said,
that the age, that is,
the value of data elements representing
the age of an entity can not be negative.
We also saw an example of
uniqueness constraint when we said
every movie can have only one title.
In the words of logic,
there should exist no data object that's
a movie and has more than one title.
It's easy to see that enforcing
these constraints requires us
to count the number of titles and
then verify that it's one.
Now, one can generalize this to count
the number of values associated with
each object and check whether it lies
between an upper and lower bound.
This is often called a cardinality
constraint of data property.
In a medical example here,
the constraint has a lower limit of 0 and
an upper limit of 3.
A different kind of value constraint can
be enforced by restricting the type of
the data allowed in a field.
If we do not have such a constraint we
can put any type of data in the field.
For example, you can have -99 as
the value of the last name of a person,
of course that would be wrong.
To ensure that this does not happen,
we can enforce the type of the last name
to be a non-numeric alphabetic string.
This example shows a logical
expression for this constraint.
A type constraint is a special
kind of domain constraint.
The domain of a data property or
attribute is the possible set of values
that are allowed for that attribute.
For example, the possible values for
the day part of the date field
can be between 1 and 31.
While a month may have
the value between 1 and 12.
Or, alternately, a value from the set
January, February, ect till December.
Now, one can devise a more complex
constraint, where the value of the date
for April, June, and September and
November, are restricted between 1 and 30.
And if you think about it,
all three constraints that we have
described in the last slide
are value constraints.
So they only state how to restrict
the values of some data property.
In sharp contrast, structural properties
restrict the structure of the data.
We'll choose a more complex example for
this.
Suppose we are a matrix,
as shown in the example, and
we've restricted to be a square matrix.
So the number of columns is exactly
equal to the number of rows.
We have not put any restriction
on the number of rows or columns.
But just that they have to be the same.
Now this constrains
the structure of the matrix and
implies that the number of entries in
the structure will be a squared number.
If we convert this matrix to a three
column table as shown, and impose
the same squareness constraint, it will
translate to a more complex condition.
That the number of data
rows will be the square of
the number of unique values
in column one of the table.
We'll encounter some more structural
constraints in the next module.